docs: haw-bridging-parent-to-child-messaging (#2047)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: arbitrum-docs/how-arbitrum-works/10-l1-to-l2-messaging.mdx

---
title: Bridging from a parent to a child chain
description: 'Learn the fundamentals of parent to child chain messaging on Arbitrum.'
author: pete-vielhaber
sme: Mehdi
user_story: As a current or prospective Arbitrum user, I need to learn more about messaging between a parent and child chain within Arbitrum.
content_type: get-started
---

> In the [Bypassing the Sequencer] section, we introduced an alternative way for users to submit transactions to a child chain by going through the parent chain's delayed inbox contract instead of sending them directly to the Sequencer. This approach is one example of a parent to child messaging path. More broadly, parent to child chain messaging covers all ways to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [Bypassing the Sequencer] section, we introduced an alternative way for users to submit transactions to a child chain by going through the parent chain's delayed inbox contract instead of sending them directly to the Sequencer. This approach is one example of a parent-to-child messaging path. More broadly, parent-to-child chain messaging covers all ways to:
```

> - Submit child chain bound transactions from a parent chain
> - Deposit ETH or native tokens from the parent chain to the child chain
> - Send arbitrary data or instuctions from the parent chain to the child chain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Submit child chain bound transactions from a parent chain
- Deposit ETH or native tokens from the parent chain to the child chain
- Send arbitrary data or instructions from the parent chain to the child chain
```

> We generally categorize these parent to child chain messaging methods as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We generally categorize these parent-to-child chain messaging methods as follows:
```

1. **Native token bridging** refers to depositing a child chain's native token from the parent chain to the child chain. Depending on the type of Arbitrum chain, this can include:

- **ETH Bridging**: For Arbitrum chains that use ETH as their gas token, users can deposit ETH onto a child chain via the delayed inbox
- **Custom gas token bridging**: For Arbitrum chains that use a custom gas token, users can deposit that chain's native token to the child chain using the same mechanism

> 2.  **Transacting via the delayed inbox** as described in the [Bypassing the Sequencer](/how-arbitrum-works/02-transaction-lifecycle.mdx#bypassing-the-sequencer) section, this method, allows users to send transaction through the parent chain. It includes two sub-types of messages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  **Transacting via the delayed inbox** as described in the [Bypassing the Sequencer](/how-arbitrum-works/02-transaction-lifecycle.mdx#bypassing-the-sequencer) section, this method, allows users to send transactions through the parent chain. It includes two sub-types of messages:
```

- **Unsigned messages**: General arbitrary data or function calls
- **Signed messages**: Messages that include a signature, enabling certain authenticated actions

> 3.  **Retryable tickets** are Arbitrum's canonical mechanism for creating parent to child messages–transactions initiated on the parent chain tha trigger execution on the child chain. This method contains the following functionality:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.  **Retryable tickets** are Arbitrum's canonical mechanism for creating parent-to-child messages–transactions initiated on the parent chain that trigger execution on the child chain. This method contains the following functionality:
```

- **General retryable messaging**: For sending arbitrary data or calls from parent to child chain
- **Customized feature messaging** (e.g., token bridging): Leveraging retryable tickets (and other messaging constructs) for specialized actions, such as bridging tokens from a parent to a child chain

> In this section, we will explore each of these categories in detail and explain how they work. The diagram below illustrates the various paths available for parent to child chain communication asset transfers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we will explore each of these categories in detail and explain how they work. The diagram below illustrates the various paths available for parent-to-child chain communication asset transfers.
```

![500px-img](../assets/l1-to-l2.svg)

## Native token bridging

Arbitrum chains can use ETH or other ERC-20 tokens as their gas fee currency. Arbitrum One and Nova use ETH as their native token, while some Orbit chains opt for a custom gas token. For more details about chains that use custom gas tokens, refer to the [Custom gas token SDK](/launch-orbit-chain/concepts/custom-gas-token-sdk.mdx).

Whether a chain uses ETH or a custom gas token, users can deposit that token from a parent chain (for Arbitrum One, it is Ethereum) to a child chain. Below, we describe how to deposit ETH on chains that use ETH as the native gas token. The process for depositing custom gas tokens follows the same steps, except it uses the chain's delayed inbox contract.

### Depositing ETH

> A special message type exists for simple ETH deposits from a parent to child chain. You can deposit ETH by calling the `Inbox` contract's `depositEth` method, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A special message type exists for simple ETH deposits from a parent-to-child chain. You can deposit ETH by calling the `Inbox` contract's `depositEth` method, for example:
```

```javascript
function depositEth(address destAddr) external payable override returns (uint256)
```

> :::note
> Depositing ETH directly via `depositEth` to a contract on a child chain **will not** invoke that contract's fallback function.
> :::
> 
> #### Using retryable tickets instead
> 
> While `depositEth` is often the simplest path, you can also use _retryable tickets_ to deposit ETH. This may be preferable if you need additional flexibility–for example, specifying an alternative destination address or triggering a fallback function a child chain.
> 
> #### How deposits work
> 
> When you call `Inbox.depositEth`, the ETH is sent to the bridge contract on the parent chain. This contract then "credits" the deposited amount to the specified address on the child chain. As far as the parent chain is concerned, the deposited ETH remains held by Arbitrum's bridge contract on your behalf.
> 
> A diagram illustrating this deposit process can be found below:
> 
> - **If the parent chain caller is an EOA** (Externally Owned Account): The deposited ETH will appear in the same EOA address on the child chain.
> - **If the parent chain caller is a contract**: The ETH will be deposited to the contract's **aliased** address on the child chain. Aliasing is described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note
Depositing ETH directly via `depositEth` to a contract on a child chain **will not** invoke that contract's fallback function.
:::

#### Using retryable tickets instead

While `depositEth` is often the simplest path, you can also use _retryable tickets_ to deposit ETH. This may be preferable if you need additional flexibility–for example, specifying an alternative destination address or triggering a fallback function in a child chain.

#### How deposits work

When you call `Inbox.depositEth`, the ETH is sent to the bridge contract on the parent chain. This contract then "credits" the deposited amount to the specified address on the child chain. As far as the parent chain is concerned, the deposited ETH remains held by Arbitrum's bridge contract on your behalf.

A diagram illustrating this deposit process can be found below:

- **If the parent chain caller is an EOA** (Externally Owned Account): The deposited ETH will appear in the same EOA address on the child chain.
- **If the parent chain caller is a contract**: The ETH will be deposited to the contract's **aliased** address on the child chain. Aliasing is described below.
```

![500px-img](../assets/aliasing.svg)

### Address aliasing

All unsigned messages submitted through the delayed inbox have their sender addresses "aliased" when executed on the child chain. Instead of returning the parent chain sender's address as `msg.sender`, the child chain sees the "child alias" of that address. Formally, the child alias is calculated as:

```solidity
Child_Alias = Parent_Contract_Address + 0x1111000000000000000000000000000000001111
```

#### Why aliasing?

> Address aliasing in Arbitrum is a security measure that prevents cross-chain exploits. Without it, a malicious actor could impersonate a contract on a child chain simply by sending a message from that contract's parent chain address. By introducing an offset, Arbitrum ensures the child chain contracts can distinguish between calls from parent chain contracts and calls from child chain native addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Address aliasing in Arbitrum is a security measure that prevents cross-chain exploits. Without it, a malicious actor could simply impersonate a contract on a child chain by sending a message from that contract's parent chain address. By introducing an offset, Arbitrum ensures the child chain contracts can distinguish between calls from parent chain contracts and calls from child chain native addresses.
```

#### Computing the original parent chain address

If you need to recover the original parent chain address from an aliased child chain address onchain, you can use Arbitrum's `AddressAliasHelper` library. This allows you to translate between the aliased child address and the original parent address in your contract logic.

```solidity
modifier onlyFromMyL1Contract() override {
    require(AddressAliasHelper.undoL1ToL2Alias(msg.sender) == myL1ContractAddress, "ONLY_COUNTERPART_CONTRACT");
    _;
}
```

## Transacting via the delayed inbox

> Arbitrum provides a _delayed inbox_ contract on the parent chain that can deliver arbitrary messages to the child chain. This functionality is important for two reasons:
> 
> 1. **General crosschain messaging**: It allows parent chain EOAs or parent chain contracts to send messages or transactions to the child chain. This is critical for bridging assets (other than the chain's native token) and performing cross-chain operations.
> 2. **Censorship resistance**: It ensures the Arbitrum chain remains censorship resistant, even if the Sequencer misbehaves or excludes certain transactions. See [Bypassing the Sequencer](/how-arbitrum-works/02-transaction-lifecycle.mdx#bypassing-the-sequencer) for more details.
> 
> Users can send child chain transactions through the delayed inbox in two primary ways:
> 
> 1. [General child chain messaging](#general-child-chain-messaging)
> 2. [Retryable tickets](#retryable-tickets)
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arbitrum provides a _delayed inbox_ contract on the parent chain that can deliver arbitrary messages to the child chain. This functionality is important for two reasons:

1. **General cross-chain messaging**: It allows parent chain EOAs or parent chain contracts to send messages or transactions to the child chain. This is critical for bridging assets (other than the chain's native token) and performing cross-chain operations.
2. **Censorship resistance**: It ensures the Arbitrum chain remains censorship-resistant, even if the Sequencer misbehaves or excludes certain transactions. See [Bypassing the Sequencer](/how-arbitrum-works/02-transaction-lifecycle.mdx#bypassing-the-sequencer) for more details.

Users can send child chain transactions through the delayed inbox in two primary ways:

1. [General child chain messaging](#general-child-chain-messaging)
2. [Retryable tickets](#retryable-tickets)

```

Example use case: [Withdraw Ether tutorial](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/arbitrum-tutorials/blob/a1c3f64a5abdd0f0e728cb94d4ecc2700eab7579/packages/delayedInbox-l2msg/scripts/withdrawFunds.js#L61-L65)

#### Delayed inbox methods for signed messages

There are two primary methods for sending signed messages:

1. `sendL2Message`

- Only an EOA with no deployed code can call this ("codeless origin")
- The signed transaction is retrieved directly from calldata, so emitting a large event log is unnecessary
- Offers lower gas costs (cheaper)

```solidity
function sendL2Message(
    bytes calldata messageData
) external whenNotPaused onlyAllowed returns (uint256)
```

2. `sendL2MessageFromOrigin`

- More flexible
- It can be called by either an EOA or a contract
- The full signed transaction data is emitted in an event log so that nodes can reconstruct the transaction without replaying it

```solidity
function sendL2MessageFromOrigin(
    bytes calldata messageData
) external whenNotPaused onlyAllowed returns (uint256);
```

### Unsigned messages

> Unsigned messages allow a Parent chain sender to specify transaction parameters without an EOA signature. Because there is no signature, **the sender's address must be aliased on the child chain** (see the [Address aliasing](#address-aliasing) section for the rationale.). The delayed inbox provides four main methods for unsigned messages, divided based on whether the sender is an EOA or a contract and whether it includes parent chain funds:
> 
> 1. **Unsigned from EOAs**: These methods incorporate a none for replay protection, similar to standard EOA-based transaction on Ethereum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unsigned messages allow a Parent chain sender to specify transaction parameters without an EOA signature. Because there is no signature, **the sender's address must be aliased on the child chain** (see the [Address aliasing](#address-aliasing) section for the rationale.). The delayed inbox provides four main methods for unsigned messages, divided based on whether the sender is an EOA or a contract and whether it includes parent chain funds:

1. **Unsigned from EOAs**: These methods incorporate a none-for replay protection, similar to standard EOA-based Ethereum transactions.
```

    bytes calldata data
) external whenNotPaused onlyAllowed returns (uint256);
```

- `sendL1FundedContractTransaction`
  - Sends the transaction _and_ transfers additional funds from the parent to child chain

```solidity
function sendL1FundedContractTransaction(
    uint256 gasLimit,
    uint256 maxFeePerGas,
    address to,
    bytes calldata data
) external payable returns (uint256);
```

In all these methods, a “delayed message” is created and passed to the parent chain bridge contract, which then arranges its inclusion on the child chain.

### Message types

Arbitrum Nitro defines various **message types** to distinguish between the categories described above (signed vs. unsigned, EOAs vs. contracts, etc.). These message types help the protocol route and process each incoming message securely.

You can find additional details on message types in the next section of the documentation.

:::note
Please refer to the [Address aliasing](#address-aliasing) discussion for more background on the topic. This mechanism ensures that a parent chain contract can't impersonate a child chain address unless it provides a valid signature as an EOA.
:::

## Retryable tickets

> Retryable tickets are Arbitrum's canonical method for creating parent to child chain messges, i.e., parent chain transactions that initiate a message to be executed on the child chain. A retryable can be submitted for a fixed cost (dependent only on its calldata size) paid at the parent chain; its _submission_ on the parent chain is separable/asynchronous with its _execution_ on the child chain. Retryables provide atomicity between the cross chain operations; if the parent chain transaction request submission succeeds (i.e,. does not revert) then the execution of the retryable on the child chain has a strong guarantee to ultimately succeed as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retryable tickets are Arbitrum's canonical method for creating parent-to-child chain messages, i.e., parent-chain transactions that initiate a message to be executed on the child chain. A retryable can be submitted for a fixed cost (dependent only on its calldata size) paid at the parent chain; its _submission_ on the parent chain is separable/asynchronous with its _execution_ on the child chain. Retryables provide atomicity between the cross-chain operations; if the parent chain transaction request submission succeeds (i.e., does not revert) then the execution of the retryable on the child chain has a strong guarantee to ultimately succeed as well.
```

### Retryable tickets lifecycle

Here we walk through the different stages of the lifecycle of a retryable ticket; (1) submission, (2) auto-redemption, and (3) manual redemption.

#### Submission

> 1. Creating a retryable ticket is initiated with a call (direct or internal) to the `createRetryableTicket` function of the `inbox` [contract](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/blob/67127e2c2fd0943d9d87a05915d77b1f220906aa/src/bridge/Inbox.sol). A ticket is guaranteed to be created if this call succeeds. Here, we describe parameters that need to be carefully set. Note that, this function forces the sender to provide a _reasonable_ amount of funds (at least enough to submitting, and _attempting_ to execute the ticket), but that doesn't guarantee a successful auto-redemption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Creating a retryable ticket is initiated with a call (direct or internal) to the `createRetryableTicket` function of the `inbox` [contract](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/blob/67127e2c2fd0943d9d87a05915d77b1f220906aa/src/bridge/Inbox.sol). A ticket is guaranteed to be created if this call succeeds. Here, we describe parameters that need to be carefully set. Note that this function forces the sender to provide a _reasonable_ amount of funds (at least enough to submit and _attempt to execute the ticket), but that doesn't guarantee a successful auto-redemption.
```

| uint256 gasLimit                            | Maximum amount of gas used to cover the child chain execution of the ticket                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| uint256 maxFeePerGas                        | The gas price bid for child chain execution of the ticket that is supplied within the deposit (`l1CallValue`)                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| bytes calldata data                         | The calldata to the destination child chain address                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

> 2. Sender's deposit must be enough to make the parent chain submission succeed and for the child chain execution to be _attempted_. If provided correctly, a new ticket with a unique `TicketID` is created and added to the retryable buffer. Also, funds (`submissionCost` + `l2CallValue`) are deducted from the sender and placed into the escrow for later use in redeeming the ticket.
> 3. Ticket creation causes the `ArbRetryableTx` precompile to emit a `TicketCreated` event containing the `TicketID` on the child chain.
> 
> **Ticket submission**
> 
> - The user who initiates a parent to child message
> - **Initiating a parent-child message**: a call to `inbox.createRetryableTicket` function that puts the message in the child chain inbox that can be re-executed for some fixed amount of time if it reverts.
> - **Check user's deposit**: logic that checks if the user has enough funds to create a ticket. This is done by checking if the `msg.value` provided by the user is greater than or equal to `maxSubmissionCost` + `l2CallValue` + `gasLimit` \* `maxFeePerGas`
> - **Ticket creation fails**: ticket creation fails and no funds are deducted from the user
> - **Ticket is created**: a ticket is created an added to the retryable buffer on the child chain and funds (`l2CallValue` + `submissionCost`) are deducted to cover the `callValue` from the user and placed into escrow (on the child chain) for later use in redeeming the ticket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Sender's deposit must be enough to make the parent chain submission succeed and for the child chain execution to be _attempted_. If provided correctly, a new ticket with a unique `TicketID` is created and added to the retryable buffer. Also, funds (`submissionCost` + `l2CallValue`) are deducted from the sender and placed into the escrow for later use in redeeming the ticket.
3. Ticket creation causes the `ArbRetryableTx` precompile to emit a `TicketCreated` event containing the `TicketID` on the child chain.

**Ticket submission**

- The user who initiates a parent-to-child message
- **Initiating a parent-child message**: a call to `inbox.createRetryableTicket` function that puts the message in the child chain inbox that can be re-executed for some fixed amount of time if it reverts.
- **Check user's deposit**: logic that checks if the user has enough funds to create a ticket. This is done by checking if the `msg.value` provided by the user is greater than or equal to `maxSubmissionCost` + `l2CallValue` + `gasLimit` \* `maxFeePerGas`
- **Ticket creation fails**: ticket creation fails and no funds are deducted from the user
- **Ticket is created**: a ticket is created and added to the retryable buffer on the child chain and funds (`l2CallValue` + `submissionCost`) are deducted to cover the `callValue` from the user and placed into escrow (on the child chain) for later use in redeeming the ticket.
```

#### Automatic redemption

> 1. It is very important to note that the submission of a ticket on the parent chain is separable/asynchronous from its execution on the child chain, i.e., a successful parent chain ticket creation does not guarantee a successful redemption. Once the ticket is successfully created, the two following conditions are checked: (1) if the user's child chain balance is greater than (or equal to) `maxFeePerGas` \* `gasLimit` **and** (2) if the `maxFeePerGas` (provided by the user in the ticket submission process) is greater than (or equal to) the `l2BaseFee`. If these conditions are both met, the ticket's submission is followed by an attempt to execute it on the child chain (i.e., an **auto-redeem** using the supplied gas, as if the `redeem` method of the [`ArbRetryableTx`](/build-decentralized-apps/precompiles/02-reference.mdx#arbretryabletx) precompile had been called). Depending on how much gas teh sender has provided in Step 1, the ticket's redemption can either (1) immediately succeed or (2) fail. We explain both situations here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It is very important to note that submitting a ticket on the parent chain is separable/asynchronous from its execution on the child chain, i.e., a successful parent chain ticket creation does not guarantee a successful redemption. Once the ticket is successfully created, the two following conditions are checked: (1) if the user's child chain balance is greater than (or equal to) `maxFeePerGas` \* `gasLimit` **and** (2) if the `maxFeePerGas` (provided by the user in the ticket submission process) is greater than (or equal to) the `l2BaseFee`. If these conditions are both met, the ticket's submission is followed by an attempt to execute it on the child chain (i.e., an **auto-redeem** using the supplied gas, as if the `redeem` method of the [`ArbRetryableTx`](/build-decentralized-apps/precompiles/02-reference.mdx#arbretryabletx) precompile had been called). Depending on how much gas the sender has provided in Step 1, the ticket's redemption can either (1) immediately succeed or (2) fail. We explain both situations here:
```

- If a `redeem` is not done at submission or the submission initial `redeem` fails (for example, because the child chain's gas price has increased unexpectedly), the submission fee is collected on the child chain to cover the resources required to temporarily keep the ticket in memory for a fixed period (one week), and only in this case, a manual redemption of the ticket is required (see [Manual redemption](#manual-redemption) section).

**Automatic redemption of the `TicketManual` redemption of the ticket**

- **Does the auto-redeem succeed?** Logic that determines if the user's child chain balance is greater than (or equal to) `maxFeePerGas` + `gasLimit` && `maxFeePerGas` is greater than (or equal to) the `l2BaseFee`.
- **Ticket is executed**, the actual `submissionFee` is refunded to the `excessFeeRefundAddress` since the ticket was not kept in the buffer on the child chain.
- **Ticket is deleted** from the child chain retryable buffer `callValueRefundedAddress` gets refunded with (`maxGas` - `gasUsed`) \* `gasPrice`. Note that this amount is capped by the `l1CallValue` in the auto-redeem.

#### Manual redemption

> 1. At this point, _anyone_ can attempt to manually redeem the ticket again by calling [`ArbRetryableTx`](/build-decentralized-apps/precompiles/02-reference.mdx#arbretryabletx)'s `redeem` precompile method, which donates the call's gas to the next attempt. Note that the amount of gas is **not** limited by the original `gasLimit` set during the ticket creation. ArbOS will [enqueue the `redeem`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/fa36a0f138b8a7e684194f9840315d80c390f324/arbos/block_processor.go#L245), which is its own special `ArbitrumRetryTx` type, to its list of redeems that ArbOS [guarantees to exhaust](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/fa36a0f138b8a7e684194f9840315d80c390f324/arbos/block_processor.go#L135) before moving on to the next non-redeem transaction in the block its forming. In this manner redeems are scheduled to happen as soon as possible, and will always be in the same block as the tx that scheduled it. Note that the redeem attempt's gas comes from the call to redeem, so there's no chance the block's gas limit is reached before execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. At this point, _anyone_ can attempt to manually redeem the ticket again by calling [`ArbRetryableTx`](/build-decentralized-apps/precompiles/02-reference.mdx#arbretryabletx)'s `redeem` precompile method, which donates the call's gas to the next attempt. Note that the amount of gas is **not** limited by the original `gasLimit` set during the ticket creation. ArbOS will [enqueue the `redeem`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/fa36a0f138b8a7e684194f9840315d80c390f324/arbos/block_processor.go#L245), which is its own special `ArbitrumRetryTx` type, to its list of redeems that ArbOS [guarantees to exhaust](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/fa36a0f138b8a7e684194f9840315d80c390f324/arbos/block_processor.go#L135) before moving on to the next non-redeem transaction in the block it's forming. In this manner redeems are scheduled to happen as soon as possible, and will always be in the same block as the tx that scheduled it. Note that the redemption attempt's gas comes from the call to redeem, so there's no chance the block's gas limit is reached before execution.
```

> 2. If the fixed period (one week) elapses withou a successful redeem, the ticket **expires** and will be [automatically discarded](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/fa36a0f138b8a7e684194f9840315d80c390f324/arbos/retryables/retryable.go#L262), unless some party has paid a fee to [keep the ticket](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/blob/a68783436b5105a64f54efe5fbd55174704a7618/src/precompiles/ArbRetryableTx.sol#L41) alive for another full period. A ticket can live indefinitely as long as it is renewed each time before it expires.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. If the fixed period (one week) elapses without a successful redemption, the ticket **expires** and will be [automatically discarded](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/fa36a0f138b8a7e684194f9840315d80c390f324/arbos/retryables/retryable.go#L262), unless some party has paid a fee to [keep the ticket](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/blob/a68783436b5105a64f54efe5fbd55174704a7618/src/precompiles/ArbRetryableTx.sol#L41) alive for another full period. A ticket can live indefinitely as long as it is renewed each time before it expires.
```

- **Is the ticket manually canceled or not redeemed within 7 days?** Logic that determines if the ticket is manually canceled or not redeemed within seven days (i.e., is expired). `callValueRefundedAddress` gets refunded with the `l2CallValue`.
- **Ticket is deleted** from the child chain retryable buffer.
- **Is the ticket manually redeemed?** Logic that determines if the ticket is manually redeemed.

#### Avoid losing funds!

> If a ticket expires after seven days without being redeemed or re-scheduled to a future date, any message and value (other than the escrowed `callValue`) it carries and could be lost without possibility of being recovered.
> 
> On success, the `To` address receives the escrowed `callValue`, and any unused gas is returned to ArbOS's gas pools. On failure, the `callValue` is returned to the escrow for the future `redeem` attempt. In either case, the network fee was paid during the scheduling tx, so no fees are charged and no refunds are made.
> 
> Note that during redemption of a ticket, attempts to cancel the same ticket, or to schedule another `redeem` of the same ticket, will revert. In this manner, retryable ticekts are not self-modifying.
> 
> If a ticket with a `callValue` is eventually discarded (canceled or expired), having never succesfully run, the escrowed `callValue` will be paid out to a `callValueRefundAddress` account that was specified in the initial submission (Step 1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a ticket expires after seven days without being redeemed or re-scheduled to a future date, any message and value (other than the escrowed `callValue`) it carries and could be lost without the possibility of being recovered.

On success, the `To` address receives the escrowed `callValue`, and any unused gas is returned to ArbOS's gas pools. On failure, the `callValue` is returned to the escrow for the future `redeem` attempt. In either case, the network fee was paid during the scheduling tx, so no fees or refunds are charged.

Note that during redemption of a ticket, attempts to cancel the same ticket, or to schedule another `redeem` of the same ticket, will revert. In this manner, retryable tickets are not self-modifying.

If a ticket with a `callValue` is eventually discarded (canceled or expired), having never successfully run, the escrowed `callValue` will be paid out to a `callValueRefundAddress` account that was specified in the initial submission (Step 1).
```

:::info Important Notes

> If a redeem is not done at submission or the submission's initial `redeem` fails, anyone can attempt to redeem the retryable again by calling `ArbRetryableTx`'s `redeem` precompile method, which donates the call's gas to the next attempt. ArbOS will [enqueue the redeem](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/fa36a0f138b8a7e684194f9840315d80c390f324/arbos/block_processor.go#L245), which is its own special [ArbitrumRetryTx](/build-decentralized-apps/precompiles/02-reference.mdx#arbretryabletx) type, to its list of redeems that ArbOS [guarantees to exhaust](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/fa36a0f138b8a7e684194f9840315d80c390f324/arbos/block_processor.go#L135) before moving on to the next non-redeem transaction in the block its forming. In this manner redeems are scheudled to happen as soon as possible, and will always be in the same block as the transaction that scheduled it. Note that the `redeem` attempt's gas comes from the call to `redeem`, so there's no chance the block's gas limit is reached before execution.
> 
> - One can redeem live tickets using the [Arbitrum Retryables Transaction Panel](https://retryable-dashboard.arbitrum.io/tx)
> - The calldata of a ticket is saved on the child chain until it is redeemed or expired

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a redeem is not done at submission or the submission's initial `redeem` fails, anyone can attempt to redeem the retryable again by calling `ArbRetryableTx`'s `redeem` precompile method, which donates the call's gas to the next attempt. ArbOS will [enqueue the redeem](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/fa36a0f138b8a7e684194f9840315d80c390f324/arbos/block_processor.go#L245), which is its own special [ArbitrumRetryTx](/build-decentralized-apps/precompiles/02-reference.mdx#arbretryabletx) type, to its list of redeems that ArbOS [guarantees to exhaust](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/fa36a0f138b8a7e684194f9840315d80c390f324/arbos/block_processor.go#L135) before moving on to the next non-redeem transaction in the block it's forming. In this manner redeems are scheduled to happen as soon as possible, and will always be in the same block as the transaction that scheduled it. Note that the `redeem` attempt's gas comes from the call to `redeem`, so there's no chance the block's gas limit is reached before execution.

- One can redeem live tickets using the [Arbitrum Retryables Transaction Panel](https://retryable-dashboard.arbitrum.io/tx)
- The calldata of a ticket is saved on the child chain until it is redeemed or expired
```

#### Alternative "unsafe" retryable ticket creation

The `Inbox.createRetryableTicket` convenience method includes sanity checks to help minimize the risk of user error: the method will ensure that enough funds are provided directly from the parent chain to cover the current cost of ticket creation. It will also convert the provided `callValueRefundAddress` and `excessFeeRefundAddress` to their [address alias](#address-aliasing) if either is a contract (determined by if the address has code during the call), providing a path for the parent chain contract to recover funds. A power-user may bypass these sanity-check measures via the `Inbox`'s `unsafeCreateRetryableTicket` method; as the method's name desperately attempts to warn you, it should only be accessed by a user who truly knows what they're doing.

## Token bridging

> We can build **customized feature messaging** (for example, token bridging) using the messaging systems described in previous sections. In particular, **retryable tickets** power Arbitrum's **canonical token bridge**, which was developed by Offchain Labs. By leveraging retryable tickets under the hood, this token bridge provides a seamless user experience for transferring assets from the parent to child chain. This section is an overview of how the system works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can build **customized feature messaging** (for example, token bridging) using the messaging systems described in previous sections. In particular, **retryable tickets** power Arbitrum's **canonical token bridge**, which was developed by Offchain Labs. By leveraging retryable tickets under the hood, this token bridge provides a seamless user experience for transferring assets from the parent-to-child chain. This section is an overview of how the system works.
```

### ERC-20 token bridging

The Arbitrum protocol itself technically has no native notion of any token standards, and gives no built-in advantage or special recognition to any particular token bridge. In this section, we describe the "canonical bridge", which was implemented by Offchain Labs, and should be the primary bridge most users and applications use; it is (effectively) a decentralized app (dApp) with contracts on both parent and child chains that leverage Arbitrum's [cross-chain message passing system](/build-decentralized-apps/04-cross-chain-messaging.mdx) to achieve basic desired token-bridging functionality. We recommend that you use it!

#### Design rationale

In our token bridge design, we use the term "gateway" as per [this proposal](https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/outlining-a-standard-interface-for-cross-domain-erc20-transfers/6151); i.e., one of a pair of contracts on two different domains (i.e., Ethereum and an Arbitrum One chain), used to facilitate cross-domain asset transfers.

We now describe some core goals that motivated the design of our bridging system.

#### Custom gateway functionality

> For many ERC-20 tokens, "standard" bridging functionality is sufficient, which entails the following: a token contract on a parent chain (i.e., Ethereum) is associated with a "paired" token contract on the child chain (i.e., Arbitrum).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For many `ERC-20` tokens, "standard" bridging functionality is sufficient, which entails the following: a token contract on a parent chain (i.e., Ethereum) is associated with a "paired" token contract on the child chain (i.e., Arbitrum).
```

> Depositing a token entails escrowing some amount of the token in a parent chain bridge contract, and minting the same amount at the paired token contract on the child chain. On the child chain, the paired contract behaves much like a normal ERC-20 token contract. Withdrawing entails bruning some amount of the token in the child chain contract, which then can later be claimed from the parent chain bridge contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depositing a token entails escrowing some amount of the token in a parent chain bridge contract, and minting the same amount at the paired token contract on the child chain. On the child chain, the paired contract behaves much like a normal `ERC-20` token contract. Withdrawing entails bridging some of the tokens in the child chain contract, which can then later be claimed from the parent chain bridge contract.
```

> Many tokens, however, require custom gateway systems, the possibilities of which are hard to generalize, e.g.,:
> 
> - Tokens which accrue interest to their holders need to ensure that the interest is dispersed properly across layers, and doesn't simply accrue to the bridge contracts
> - Our cross-domain WETH implementations require tokens be wrapped and unwrapped as they move across layers.
> 
> Thus, our bridge architecture must allow not only the standard deposit and withdraw functionalities, but for new, custom gateways to by dynamically added over time.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many tokens, however, require custom gateway systems, the possibilities of which are hard to generalize, e.g.,:

- Tokens which accrue interest to their holders need to ensure that the interest is dispersed properly across layers, and doesn't simply accrue to the bridge contracts
- Our cross-domain `WETH` implementations require tokens to be wrapped and unwrapped as they move across layers.

Thus, our bridge architecture must allow not only the standard deposit and withdraw functionalities but also new, custom gateways to be dynamically added over time.

```

Having multiple custom gateways is well and good, but we also want to avoid a situation in which a single parent chain token that uses our bridging system can be represented at multiple addresses/contracts on the child chain as this adds significant friction and confusion for users and developers. Thus, we need a way to track which parent chain token uses which gateway, and in turn, to have a canonical address oracle that maps the tokens addresses across the parent and child chain domains.

### Canonical token bridge implementation

With this in mind, we provide an overview of our token bridging architecture.
Our architecture consists of three types of contracts:

1. **Asset contracts**: These are the token contracts themselves, i.e., an ERC-20 on the parent chain and it's counterpart on the child chain.
2. **Gatways**: Pairs of contracts (one on the parent chain, and one on the child chain) that implement a particular type of cross-chain asset bridging.
3. Routers: Exactly two contracts (one on the parent chain, and one on the child chain) that route each asset to its designated gateway.

![500px-img](../assets/canonical-bridge.svg)

> All parent to child token transfers are initiated via the router contract on the parent chain, the `L1GatewayRouter` contract. `L1GatewayRouter` forwards the token's deposit call to the appropriate gateway contract on the parent chain, the `L1ArbitrumGateway` contract. `L1GatewayRouter` is responsible for mapping parent chain token addresses to L1Gateway contracts, thus acting as a parent/child address oracle and ensuring each token corresponds to only one gateway. The `L1ArbitrumGateway` then communicates to its counterpart gateway contract on the child chain, the `L2ArbitrumGateway` contract (typically/expectedly via [Retryable tickets](#retryable-tickets)).
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All parent-to-child token transfers are initiated via the router contract on the parent chain, the `L1GatewayRouter` contract. `L1GatewayRouter` forwards the token's deposit call to the appropriate gateway contract on the parent chain, the `L1ArbitrumGateway` contract. `L1GatewayRouter` is responsible for mapping parent chain token addresses to L1Gateway contracts, thus acting as a parent/child address oracle and ensuring each token corresponds to only one gateway. The `L1ArbitrumGateway` then communicates to its counterpart gateway contract on the child chain, the `L2ArbitrumGateway` contract (typically/expectedly via [Retryable tickets](#retryable-tickets)).

```

### The standard ERC-20 gateway

By default, any ERC-20 token on a parent chain that isn't registered to a gateway can be permissionlessly bridged through the `StandardERC20Gateway`.
You can use the [bridge UI](https://bridge.arbitrum.io/) or follow the instructions in [How to bridge tokens via Arbitrum's standard ERC-20 gateway](/build-decentralized-apps/token-bridging/bridge-tokens-programmatically/02-how-to-bridge-tokens-standard.mdx) to bridge a token to a child chain via this gateway.

#### Example: Standard Arb-ERC-20 deposit and withdraw

To help illustrate what this all looks like in practice, let's go through the steps of what depositing and withdrawing `SomeERC20Token` via our standard ERC-20 gateway looks like. Here, we're assuming that `SomeERC20Token` has already been registered in the `L1GatewayRouter` to use the standard ERC-20 gateway.

#### Deposits

> 1. A user calls `L1GatewayRouter.outboundTransferCustomRefund` (with `SomeERC20Token`'s parent chain address as an argument).
>    :::warning
>    Please keep in mind that some older custom gateways might not have `outboundTransferCustomRefund` implemented and `L1GatewayRouter.outboundTransferCustomRefund` does not fallback to `outboundTransfer`. In those cases, please use function `L1GatewayRouter.outboundTransfer`.
>    :::
> 
> 2. `L1GatewayRouter` looks up `SomeERC20Token`'s gateway, and finds that it's the standard ERC-20 gateway (the `L1ERC20Gateway` contract).
> 3. `L1GatewayRouter` calls `L1ERC20Gateway.outboundTransferCustomRefund`, forwarding the appropriate parameters.
> 4. `L1ERC20Gateway` escrows the tokens sent and creates a retryable ticket to trigger `L2ERC20Gateway`'s `finalizeInboundTransfer` method on the child chain.
> 5. `L2ERC20Gateway.finalizeInboundTransfer` mints the appropriate amount of tokens at the `arbSomeERC20Token` contract on the child chain.
> 
> :::note
> `arbSomeERC20Token` is an instance of [StandardArbERC20](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/token-bridge-contracts/blob/main/contracts/tokenbridge/arbitrum/StandardArbERC20.sol), which includes `bridgeMint` and `bridgeBurn` methods only callable by the L2ERC20Gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A user calls `L1GatewayRouter.outboundTransferCustomRefund` (with `SomeERC20Token`'s parent chain address as an argument).
   :::warning
   Please keep in mind that some older custom gateways might not have `outboundTransferCustomRefund` implemented and `L1GatewayRouter.outboundTransferCustomRefund` does not fall back to `outboundTransfer`. In those cases, please use function `L1GatewayRouter.outboundTransfer`.
   :::

2. `L1GatewayRouter` looks up `SomeERC20Token`'s gateway, and finds that it's the standard ERC-20 gateway (the `L1ERC20Gateway` contract).
3. `L1GatewayRouter` calls `L1ERC20Gateway.outboundTransferCustomRefund`, forwarding the appropriate parameters.
4. `L1ERC20Gateway` escrows the tokens sent and creates a retryable ticket to trigger `L2ERC20Gateway`'s `finalizeInboundTransfer` method on the child chain.
5. `L2ERC20Gateway.finalizeInboundTransfer` mints the appropriate amount of tokens at the `arbSomeERC20Token` contract on the child chain.

:::note
`arbSomeERC20Token` is an instance of [StandardArbERC20](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/token-bridge-contracts/blob/main/contracts/tokenbridge/arbitrum/StandardArbERC20.sol), which includes `bridgeMint` and `bridgeBurn` methods only callable by the L2ERC20Gateway.
```

:::

### The Arbitrum generic-custom gateway

> Just because a token has requirements beyond what are offered via the standard ERC-20 gateway, that doesn't necessarily mean that a unique gateway needs to be tailor-made for the token in question. Our generic-custom gateway is designed to be flexible enough to be suitable for most (but not necessarily all) custom fungible token needs. As a general rule:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just because a token has requirements beyond what are offered via the standard `ERC-20` gateway, that doesn't necessarily mean that a unique gateway needs to be tailor-made for the token in question. Our generic-custom gateway is designed to be flexible enough to be suitable for most (but not necessarily all) custom fungible token needs. As a general rule:
```

> **If your custom token has the ability to increase its supply (i.e., mint) directly on the child chain, and you want the child chain-minted tokens be withdrawable back to the parent chain and recognized by the parent chain contract, it will probably require its own special gateway. Otherwise, the generic-custom gateway is likely the right solution for you!**
> 
> Some examples of token features suitable for the generic-custom gateway:
> 
> - A child chain token contract upgradable via a proxy
> - A child chain token contract that includes address whitelisting/blacklisting
> - The deployer determines the address of the child chain token contract

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**If your custom token has the ability to increase its supply (i.e., mint) directly on the child chain, and you want the child chain-minted tokens to be withdrawable back to the parent chain and recognized by the parent chain contract, it will probably require its own special gateway. Otherwise, the generic-custom gateway is likely the right solution for you!**

Some examples of token features suitable for the generic-custom gateway:

- A child chain token contract upgradable via a proxy
- A child chain token contract that includes address whitelisting/blacklisting
- The deployer determines the address of the child chain token contract
```

#### Setting up your token with a generic custom gateway

> Follow the following steps to get your token set up to use the generic-custom gateway. You can also find more detailed instructions in the page [How to bridge tokens via Arbitrum's genric-custom gateway](/build-decentralized-apps/token-bridging/bridge-tokens-programmatically/03-how-to-bridge-tokens-generic-custom.mdx).
> 
> **Pre-requisites**
> Your token on a parent chain should conform to teh [ICustomToken](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/token-bridge-contracts/blob/main/contracts/tokenbridge/ethereum/ICustomToken.sol) interface (see [TestCustomTokenL1](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/token-bridge-contracts/blob/main/contracts/tokenbridge/test/TestCustomTokenL1.sol) for an example implementation). Crucially, it must have an `isArbitrumEnabled` method in its interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the following steps to set up your token for the generic-custom gateway. You can also find more detailed instructions on the page [How to bridge tokens via Arbitrum's genric-custom gateway](/build-decentralized-apps/token-bridging/bridge-tokens-programmatically/03-how-to-bridge-tokens-generic-custom.mdx).

**Pre-requisites**
Your token on a parent chain should conform to the [ICustomToken](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/token-bridge-contracts/blob/main/contracts/tokenbridge/ethereum/ICustomToken.sol) interface (see [TestCustomTokenL1](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/token-bridge-contracts/blob/main/contracts/tokenbridge/test/TestCustomTokenL1.sol) for an example implementation). Crucially, it must have an `isArbitrumEnabled` method in its interface.
```

2. **Register your token on the parent chain to your token on the child chain via the L1CustomGateway contract**

- Have your parent chain's token contract make an external call to `L1CustomGateway.registerTokenToL2`. This registration can alternatively be performed as a chain-owner registration via an [Arbitrum DAO](https://forum.arbitrum.foundation/) proposal.

3. **Register your token on the parent chain to the L1GatewayRouter**

- After your token's registration to the generic-custom gateway is complete, have your parent chain's token contract make an external call to `L1GatewayRouter.setGateway`; this registration can also alternatively be performed as a chain-owner registration via an [Arbitrum DAO](https://forum.arbitrum.foundation/) proposal.

We are here to help. If you have questions about your custom token needs, feel free to reach out on our [Discord server](https://discord.gg/arbitrum).

### Other flavors of gateways

> Note that in the system described above, one pair of gateway contracts handles the bridging of many ERC-20s; i.e., many ERC-20s on the parent chain are each paired with their own ERC-20s on the child chain via a single gateway contract pairing. Other gateways may well bear different relations with the contracts that they bridge.
> 
> Take our wrapped Ether implementation for example: here, a single WETH contract on the parent chain is connected to a single WETH contract on the child chain. When transferring WETH from one domain to another, the parent/child gateway architecture is used to unwrap the WETH on domain A, transfer the now unwrapped Ether, and then re-wrap it on domain B. This enures that WETH can behave on the child chain the way users are used to it behaving on the parent chain, while ensuring that all WETH tokens are always fully collateralized on the layer in which they reside.
> 
> No matter the complexity of a particular token's bridging needs, a gateway can in principle be created to accomodate it within our canonical bridging system.
> 
> You can find an example of an implementation of a custom gateway in the page [How to bridge tokens via a custom gateway](/build-decentralized-apps/token-bridging/bridge-tokens-programmatically/04-how-to-bridge-tokens-custom-gateway.mdx).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that in the system described above, one pair of gateway contracts handles the bridging of many ERC-20s; i.e., many `ERC-20`s on the parent chain are each paired with their own `ERC-20`s on the child chain via a single gateway contract pairing. Other gateways may well bear different relations with the contracts that they bridge.

Take our wrapped Ether implementation for example: here, a single WETH contract on the parent chain is connected to a single WETH contract on the child chain. When transferring WETH from one domain to another, the parent/child gateway architecture is used to unwrap the `WETH` on domain A, transfer the now unwrapped Ether, and then re-wrap it on domain B. This enures that `WETH` can behave on the child chain the way users are used to it behaving on the parent chain, while ensuring that all `WETH` tokens are always fully collateralized on the layer in which they reside.

No matter the complexity of a particular token's bridging needs, a gateway can in principle be created to accommodate it within our canonical bridging system.

You can find an example of an implementation of a custom gateway on the page [How to bridge tokens via a custom gateway](/build-decentralized-apps/token-bridging/bridge-tokens-programmatically/04-how-to-bridge-tokens-custom-gateway.mdx).
```
